README.md, before:

# Synthetic Project Management Analytics

This repository contains a fully reproducible analytics project built around a **synthetic project management** dataset.  It is designed to demonstrate the skills expected of business analysts, program managers and data analysts.  The project walks through exploratory data analysis, visualization and predictive modelling on a clean dataset, making it suitable as a portfolio piece when applying for data–focused roles.

## Dataset

The file `synthetic_project_data.csv` holds 1 000 rows of artificial project data.  Each row describes a fictional project with the following fields:

| Column | Description |
|------|-------------|
| `team_size` | Size of the project team (between 2 and 10 members). |
| `budget` | Budget allocated to the project in US dollars (between 50 000 and 1 000 000). |
| `complexity` | Project complexity on a five‑point scale (1 = lowest complexity, 5 = highest). |
| `client_importance` | Importance of the client on a five‑point scale (1 = lowest importance, 5 = highest). |
| `duration_days` | Actual duration of the project in days (30–364). |
| `success` | Binary label indicating whether the project was successful (1 = success, 0 = failure).  This outcome is generated using a logistic function of the other features to simulate realistic correlations. |

The dataset is **synthetic**, meaning it does not contain real personal or corporate data.  Using synthetic data is a common way to protect privacy while still enabling analytics and model development【865990695532403†L243-L304】.

## Requirements

All dependencies are listed in `requirements.txt`.  Install them with:

```bash
pip install -r requirements.txt
```

The key libraries used are:

- **pandas** and **numpy** for data manipulation.
- **matplotlib** and **seaborn** for visualization.
- **scikit‑learn** for building regression and classification models.

## Running the analysis

The primary analysis is contained in the Jupyter notebook `analysis_notebook.ipynb`.  The notebook is structured to increase in complexity as you progress:

1. **Introduction & Data Loading** – read the CSV into a pandas DataFrame and inspect the first few rows.
2. **Descriptive Statistics** – compute summary statistics to understand the range and distribution of each variable.
3. **Exploratory Visualisations** – plot histograms and a correlation heatmap to explore relationships among variables.
4. **Regression Modelling** – build a linear regression model to predict project duration (`duration_days`) from the other features.  Evaluate performance using mean absolute error and R².
5. **Classification Modelling** – build a logistic regression model to predict project success (`success`).  Evaluate performance using accuracy, a classification report and a confusion matrix.  This section demonstrates how logistic regression converts input features into probabilities using the sigmoid function【514564861997090†L80-L86】.
6. **Probability Visualisation** – visualise the distribution of predicted probabilities of success to interpret model confidence.

To run the notebook:

```bash
# Clone the repository
git clone <your‑fork‑url>
cd synthetic-project-management-analytics

# (Optional) create a virtual environment
python3 -m venv venv
source venv/bin/activate

# Install dependencies
pip install -r requirements.txt

# Launch Jupyter and open the notebook
jupyter notebook analysis_notebook.ipynb
```

Execute the cells in order; each section builds on the previous one.  Feel free to experiment by adding additional models (e.g. random forests, gradient boosting) or performing hyper‑parameter tuning.

## Regenerating the dataset

If you wish to customise the dataset (e.g. change the number of samples or adjust feature distributions), refer to the script `create_repo_project.py`.  It defines a function `generate_synthetic_dataset` that can be called to produce a new CSV file with customised parameters.  Regenerating the data is completely deterministic when you supply the same random seed, making it easy to reproduce results.

## Motivation

This project is intended as a portfolio example demonstrating:

- How to build a reproducible data pipeline using Python.
- How to perform exploratory data analysis and visualise key insights.
- How to apply both regression and classification models to real‑world style problems.
- How synthetic data can be used to safely practise analytic skills while avoiding privacy concerns【865990695532403†L243-L304】.

Please feel free to fork this repository, experiment with the notebook, and adapt the project to your own needs.  Contributions and suggestions are welcome!

Commit message:

Update README: clarify sample dataset and dataset regeneration instructions
README now notes that the CSV contains only the first 100 rows of the synthetic dataset and explains how to regenerate the full 1,000-row dataset using create_repo_project.py.

README.md, after:

# Synthetic Project Management Analytics

This repository contains a fully reproducible analytics project built around a **synthetic project management** dataset.  It is designed to demonstrate the skills expected of business analysts, program managers and data analysts.  The project walks through exploratory data analysis, visualization and predictive modelling on a clean dataset, making it suitable as a portfolio piece when applying for data–focused roles.

## Dataset

The file `synthetic_project_data.csv` included in this repository contains the first 100 rows of an artificial project dataset. Each row describes a fictional project with the following fields. To generate the full 1,000-row dataset, run the `create_repo_project.py` script.

| Column | Description |
|------|-------------|
| `team_size` | Size of the project team (between 2 and 10 members). |
| `budget` | Budget allocated to the project in US dollars (between 50 000 and 1 000 000). |
| `complexity` | Project complexity on a five‑point scale (1 = lowest complexity, 5 = highest). |
| `client_importance` | Importance of the client on a five‑point scale (1 = lowest importance, 5 = highest). |
| `duration_days` | Actual duration of the project in days (30–364). |
| `success` | Binary label indicating whether the project was successful (1 = success, 0 = failure).  This outcome is generated using a logistic function of the other features to simulate realistic correlations. |

The dataset is **synthetic**, meaning it does not contain real personal or corporate data.  Using synthetic data is a common way to protect privacy while still enabling analytics and model development【865990695532403†L243-L304】.

## Requirements

All dependencies are listed in `requirements.txt`.  Install them with:

```bash
pip install -r requirements.txt
```

The key libraries used are:

- **pandas** and **numpy** for data manipulation.
- **matplotlib** and **seaborn** for visualization.
- **scikit‑learn** for building regression and classification models.

## Running the analysis

The primary analysis is contained in the Jupyter notebook `analysis_notebook.ipynb`.  The notebook is structured to increase in complexity as you progress:

1. **Introduction & Data Loading** – read the CSV into a pandas DataFrame and inspect the first few rows.
2. **Descriptive Statistics** – compute summary statistics to understand the range and distribution of each variable.
3. **Exploratory Visualisations** – plot histograms and a correlation heatmap to explore relationships among variables.
4. **Regression Modelling** – build a linear regression model to predict project duration (`duration_days`) from the other features.  Evaluate performance using mean absolute error and R².
5. **Classification Modelling** – build a logistic regression model to predict project success (`success`).  Evaluate performance using accuracy, a classification report and a confusion matrix.  This section demonstrates how logistic regression converts input features into probabilities using the sigmoid function【514564861997090†L80-L86】.
6. **Probability Visualisation** – visualise the distribution of predicted probabilities of success to interpret model confidence.

To run the notebook:

```bash
# Clone the repository
git clone <your‑fork‑url>
cd synthetic-project-management-analytics

# (Optional) create a virtual environment
python3 -m venv venv
source venv/bin/activate

# Install dependencies
pip install -r requirements.txt

# Launch Jupyter and open the notebook
jupyter notebook analysis_notebook.ipynb
```

Execute the cells in order; each section builds on the previous one.  Feel free to experiment by adding additional models (e.g. random forests, gradient boosting) or performing hyper‑parameter tuning.

## Regenerating the dataset

If you wish to customise the dataset (e.g. change the number of samples or adjust feature distributions), refer to the script `create_repo_project.py`.  It defines a function `generate_synthetic_dataset` that can be called to produce a new CSV file with customised parameters.  Regenerating the data is completely deterministic when you supply the same random seed, making it easy to reproduce results.

## Motivation

This project is intended as a portfolio example demonstrating:

- How to build a reproducible data pipeline using Python.
- How to perform exploratory data analysis and visualise key insights.
- How to apply both regression and classification models to real‑world style problems.
- How synthetic data can be used to safely practise analytic skills while avoiding privacy concerns【865990695532403†L243-L304】.

Please feel free to fork this repository, experiment with the notebook, and adapt the project to your own needs.  Contributions and suggestions are welcome!
